Espejote: Documentation overhaul (#397)
appuio/openshift4-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/architecture/espejote-in-cluster-templating-controller.adoc

[source,yaml]
----
triggers:
- name: interval <1>
  interval: 10s
- name: ext-configmaps
  watchResource:
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    labelSelector:
      matchExpressions:
      - key: espejote.io/created-by
        operator: DoesNotExist
    minTimeBetweenTriggers: 10s
- name: my-configmap
  watchResource:
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    name: my-configmap
----
<1> Free form name for the trigger.
Can be referenced in the template and used to decide on partial re-renders.

> The trigger that fires is exposed to the Jsonnet as `esp.triggerData()` and `esp.triggerData()`.

Reviewer: Should be 

```suggestion
The trigger that fires is exposed to the Jsonnet as `esp.triggerName()` and `esp.triggerData()`.
```

> The trigger that fires is exposed to the Jsonnet as `esp.triggerData()` and `esp.triggerData()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The trigger that fires is exposed to the Jsonnet as `esp.triggerData()` and `esp.triggerName()`.
```

The `minTimeBetweenTriggers` field can be used to limit the rate of re-renders.
This is useful to prevent a high rate of re-renders when a resource is changed multiple times in a short period.
If a list of resources is watched, the `minTimeBetweenTriggers` is applied to each resource individually.
`minTimeBetweenTriggers` is https://github.com/vshn/espejote/issues/45[coming soon].

The `watchResource` trigger contains the full Kubernetes resource definition of the watched resource.

The resource is available in the Jsonnet template as `esp.triggerData().resource`.

==== `watchContextResource`

> The `watchContextResource` trigger works the same as the `watchResource` trigger, but copies cache and configuration from a context resource.

Reviewer: Maybe reword a bit to make it clearer that this will share the cache with the context?

```suggestion
The `watchContextResource` trigger works the same as the `watchResource` trigger, but shares cache and configuration with a context resource.
```

> This avoids duplicate, possibly drifting, configuration when using he same configuration for both the context and the trigger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This avoids duplicate, possibly drifting, configuration when using the same configuration for both the context and the trigger.
```

The template can use libraries to share code between templates.
The libraries are stored as <<JsonnetLibrary>> resources.

The following libraries are available:

> - "espejote.libsonnet": The built in library for accessing the context and trigger information.
> - "lib/<NAME>/<KEY>" libraries in the shared library namespace. The name corresponds to the name of the JsonnetLibrary object and the key to the key in the data field.
> The namespace is configured at controller startup and normally points to the namespace of the controller.
> - "<NAME>/<KEY>" libraries in the same namespace as the ManagedResource.

Reviewer: This probably needs empty lines above and below to properly render the list

```suggestion

- "espejote.libsonnet": The built in library for accessing the context and trigger information.
- "lib/<NAME>/<KEY>" libraries in the shared library namespace. The name corresponds to the name of the JsonnetLibrary object and the key to the key in the data field.
The namespace is configured at controller startup and normally points to the namespace of the controller.
- "<NAME>/<KEY>" libraries in the same namespace as the ManagedResource.

```

The `ManagedResources` should run with the least permissions possible.

=== Namespace isolation

By default the `ManagedResource` is namespace scoped.

> Namespace fields need to be set to `""` explicitly if resources from all namespaces are required.

Reviewer: Maybe clearer with the following?

```suggestion
Namespace fields for triggers and contexts need to be set to `""` explicitly if resources from all namespaces are required.
```

Returned resources will default to the namespace of the `ManagedResource` if not explicitly set.

=== Running `ManagedResources` in the context of a service account

The `ManagedResource` is run in the context of a service account.
The service account must hold all permissions required to query and apply the resources.

> If no service account is specified, the `ManagedResource` will run context of the namespaces default service account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no service account is specified, the `ManagedResource` will run context of the namespace's `default` service account.
```

      - kubernetes
    status:
      phase: Active
context:
- name: namespaces
  resources:
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Namespace
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: "2025-03-17T12:41:04Z"
      labels:
        kubernetes.io/metadata.name: blub
        managedresource-sample.espejote.io/inject-cm: glug
      name: blub
      resourceVersion: "1268206"
      uid: 62bf8581-6e7b-49df-b1bb-3b2ad46405e9
    spec:
      finalizers:
      - kubernetes
    status:
      phase: Active
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Namespace
    metadata:
      creationTimestamp: "2025-03-17T20:50:58Z"
      labels:
        kubernetes.io/metadata.name: blub2
        managedresource-sample.espejote.io/inject-cm: glugindeed
      name: blub2
      resourceVersion: "1268191"
      uid: b1d4b12a-e7d8-4334-ba68-b598e88c4dfb
    spec:
      finalizers:
      - kubernetes
    status:
      phase: Active
libraries:
  jsonnetlibrary-sample/sample.libsonnet: "{Sample: 'Hello World'}" <4>
----
<1> The template is rendered for every trigger.
If multiple different contexts variations are required, a new file should be created for each combination.
<2> Empty trigger to test a full `ManagedResource` reconciliation.

> <3> Real resources exporter from a cluster by using `espejote collect-input my-template.yaml`

Reviewer: Probably

```suggestion
<3> Real resources exported from a cluster by using `espejote collect-input my-template.yaml`
```

> <4> The JsonnetLibraries used are exported from the cluster and included in the input file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<4> Any JsonnetLibraries used by the template are exported from the cluster and included in the input file.
```

[source,bash]
----
espejote render my-template.yaml --input my-input-1.yaml --input my-input-2.yaml <1>
----
<1> The command can be used with multiple input files to test different context variations.

== Admission

Espejote manages `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` or `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` through `Admission` resources.
The `Admission` allows validating API requests or mutating them before they're persisted in the cluster.

=== Webhook configuration

Most webhook configurations are exposed in the `Admission` resource to make configuration as flexible as possible.

> Espejote manages the service part and injects a namespace selector for namespaced admissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Espejote manages the service configuration for the generated admission webhook configurations and injects a namespace selector for namespaced admissions.
```

    local user = admission.admissionRequest().userInfo.username; <3>
    local obj = admission.admissionRequest().object;

    if std.get(obj.metadata, 'annotations') == null then
      admission.patched('added user annotation', admission.assertPatch([ <4>
        admission.jsonPatchOp('add', '/metadata/annotations', { 'creator': user }),
      ]))
    else
      admission.patched('added user annotation', admission.assertPatch([
        admission.jsonPatchOp('add', '/metadata/annotations/creator', user),
      ]))
  webhookConfiguration: <5>
    rules:
      - apiGroups:
          - ''
        apiVersions:
          - '*'
        operations:
          - CREATE
        resources:
          - pods
----
<1> `mutating` is true if the webhook should mutate the resource.
<2> `espejote.libsonnet` provides facilities to access the admission request and create patches from it.
<3> `admissionRequest` returns the full admission request as defined in https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/api/admission/v1#AdmissionRequest.
<4> `admission.patched` returns a patch that can be applied to the resource.
Other valid return values are `admission.allowed(msg)` and `admission.denied(msg)`.

> `admission.assertPatch` ensures the patch can be applied to the resource or fail the admission otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`admission.assertPatch` validates whether the patch can be applied to the resource and fails the admission if the patch isn't valid.
```
